The Project Gutenberg eBook of Her Christmas at the Hermitage, by
Helen Topping Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Her Christmas at the Hermitage
       A Tale About Rachel and Andrew Jackson

Author: Helen Topping Miller

Release Date: July 6, 2021 [eBook #65782]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HER CHRISTMAS AT THE
HERMITAGE ***





                             HER CHRISTMAS
                                 AT THE
                               HERMITAGE


                 A Tale about Rachel and Andrew Jackson

                                   BY
                          HELEN TOPPING MILLER


                      LONGMANS, GREEN AND COMPANY
                      NEW YORK · LONDON · TORONTO
                                  1955

                     LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO., INC.
                      55 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 3

                      LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO. Ltd.
                   6 & 7 CLIFFORD STREET, LONDON W 1

                        LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
                     20 CRANFIELD ROAD, TORONTO 16

                     HER CHRISTMAS AT THE HERMITAGE

                            COPYRIGHT · 1955
                    BY LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO., INC.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REPRODUCE THIS BOOK, OR ANY
                      PORTION THEREOF, IN ANY FORM

         PUBLISHED SIMULTANEOUSLY IN THE DOMINION OF CANADA BY
                    LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO., TORONTO

                             FIRST EDITION

            LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER 55-9896

                Printed in the United States of America




                             HER CHRISTMAS
                            AT THE HERMITAGE




                                   1


Hannah was fat and her knees were getting stiff. When she had a chance
to rest on the well-polished stool before the fireplace, it was a
groaning misery for her to get up again. Her head, wrapped in a starched
white turban, thrust forward followed by a lunge of her shoulders till
finally her legs could be persuaded to lift her erect. But once on foot
she glared at the black women who giggled in corners, and at toothless
old Moll. Moll had come all the way from Virginia. She remembered the
long terrifying journey down the river to the Cumberland, the Indians,
the hardships. She was privileged. She had no work to do now.

“You black trash better stir your stumps,” Hannah snapped, “Heap of
company comin’. You, Betty, you put more sage in that dressin’. I raised
them turkeys. Ain’t goin’ to have ’em ruint. Mis’ Jackson, she like her
turkey seasoned high.”

Betty, narrow-faced and thin-lipped, gave an irritated shrug. But she
did not look about for sympathetic support from the others, from the
heckling tyranny of old Hannah, knowing that it would be nonexistent.
Betty was a pariah on the plantation, holding her place only because she
was the best cook in the county. Last year she had been sent back from
Pensacola for rebellious behavior. It was whispered that she had been
ordered whipped by General Jackson, had escaped that bitter disgrace
because the General’s lady had a heart as soft as butter. No other house
servant at the Hermitage had ever been ordered whipped and the stigma of
her disgrace lay now over Betty’s peaked brows, her bitter mouth. Nobody
ever talked to her, they all shied away from her aura of wickedness. All
but Emily Donelson, Rachel Jackson’s favorite niece.

“You let Betty alone,” Emily ordered now, looking up from counting out
silver on a long table. “Dilsey, you see that Simmy rubs all these
spoons with fuller’s earth and soda. Let’s see—I count fifty-two.
There’ll be Hutchingses and Hayses, Eastins, Donelsons—we’ll have to set
two tables and the children may have to wait. Has Sary got the napkins
ironed good and stiff?”

“Sary ironin’ in the washhouse now, Young Miss. She just yelled for Goby
fetch her more charcoal to hot her irons up good.”

“Hannah, you come along with me while I ask aunt Rachel to unlock the
press. We’ll need all the long tablecloths and they’ll have to be
pressed. I’ll need four more spoons. These are those lovely French ones
uncle Jackson brought from New Orleans. You tell Simmy to be mighty
careful with them, Dilsey. Come along, Hannah. People may begin coming
in today. There’s a lot to do.”

“Young Master Jack, he comin’?” asked Hannah boldly, grinning at the
bright flush that warmed the young girl’s face.

Emily, fifteen, imperiously lovely, red-haired, shook her head sadly.
“Uncle Jackson won’t let him come. I think it’s mean. He’s making Jack
stay on in that old law school when he wants to be at home for
Christmas.”

“Learnin’,” commented Hannah. “It mighty fine. Do Mis’ Rachel read to me
outen her Bible, glory just shine around. And when the General spout big
words out of books I gits shivers up my back.”

Emily hurried along the bricked way that set the kitchen apart from the
big house. The wind was fresh and keen off the Tennessee hills and she
drew her shawl close around her slender shoulders. In the house huge
wood fires burned in three fireplaces but the hall where the curving
stairs came down was chilly. She opened the dining room door and slipped
inside quickly.

Rachel Jackson, with a Negro woman helping and a half-grown boy up on a
stool, was getting china down from a high corner cupboard.

Aunt Rachel was getting heavy, Emily noted, and her breath quick and
short. She gasped occasionally as she bent over the table, counting the
plates the Negress set down, laughing a little as she straightened and
drew a long breath.

“Law, I must be getting old, Emily. I get so short-winded every time I
exert myself the least bit. I declare these china plates are still the
prettiest ones I’ve got. Not a nick in one of them. That’s because I’ve
always washed them myself. These came all the way from Pittsburgh by
boat. My gracious, that was twenty-seven years ago! Brother Samuel went
all the way up into Kentucky some place with the wagon to meet the boat
and bring the goods to Nashville to your uncle Jackson’s store. Indians
were everywhere too, those days. I was so nervous I couldn’t sleep till
Brother Sam got back and my husband too—he was away off to Philadelphia.
Sam was gone forty six days and my husband gone for two months.”

“You’ve been alone so much, aunt Rachel. If ever I get a husband I won’t
let him leave me for even one day.”

Rachel let her breath out slowly. There was that little pain again, that
came sometimes. She used Magic Sanitive Salve faithfully as her husband
directed but it didn’t seem to do much good.

“When you get a husband he’ll go where duty calls him and you won’t be
able to hold him back any more than any other woman. But it does look as
though duty called Andrew Jackson more than most men and into more
dangerous places. I declare I still like these old plates best of all.
Maybe it’s because they were the first nice things ever I owned.”

“Uncle Jackson likes the dangerous places,” Emily said. “He wouldn’t
have missed all that Indian fighting and defeating the British at New
Orleans for anything.”

Rachel pursed her lips. “He didn’t like that business of being governor
of Florida any better than I did. Thank the Lord we got away from that
place! So hot there in Pensacola and all that babble-gabble around you,
all Spanish so you couldn’t tell if they were calling you names or not.
I was mighty thankful to turn my face back towards Tennessee and poor
little Andy was sick every minute we were there.”

“It was the mosquitoes,” declared Andrew Jackson, Junior, from his high
perch on the stool. “They poisoned me. I can’t help it if my hide is
thin. And all that pepper in the victuals—onions too, and I never could
bear onions. What else do you want from up here, Mama? Nothing left but
soup tureens and teapots.”

“We’ll need two tureens. Your Papa thinks he hasn’t had anything to eat
unless he has soup. Count those plates again, will you, Emily? My head’s
all in a swivet. As many crowds of people as I’ve fed on this place
you’d think I’d get used to it but I always forget something.”

Hannah came in then for the tablecloths that Sary would press. Little
Negroes would hold the corners and edges high so that they would not
touch the floor and when the five-yard lengths of damask were glistening
smooth they would be carried in ceremoniously and spread over a spare
bed till Christmas morning.

Rachel Jackson liked to be proud of her table, and this was Christmas,
the first Christmas that she had had her husband at home with her for
more years than she liked to remember. She walked through the rooms of
her beautiful, new brick house trying not to feel too sinfully proud.
Her new, lovely Hermitage, built under the huge trees exactly where she
had wished it to be looked out upon the fields of the plantation through
windows that in the parlors were curtained with lace.

Upstairs and in her own big bedroom below were the fine French beds the
General had bought in New Orleans. Seven crates of beautiful furniture
on which the freight bill alone had been two hundred and seventy-three
dollars. Her own bed was elegantly fluted, of mahogany, with high posts,
a mosquito canopy of the finest muslin and a knotted Marseilles
counterpane.

There was the new sideboard in the dining room too, and in the cellar
gallons of the best brandy, old Madeira, claret and porter, bottles of
bitters in green glass and boxes of candied fruit. The turkeys and
chickens old Hannah had raised so faithfully were fat, and five turkeys
were being readied for roasting now in the kitchen. Rachel paused at a
south window and looked out across the wide lawn, a bit bleak now that
the trees were bare and all the flowers of her garden brown and dead
from frost. The pillared portico made her heart expand with pride.

A far cry, this palace of a house from the old log blockhouse in which
they had lived for so many years, where she had lain alone for so many
desolate nights, thinking of that audacious firebrand of a man she had
married, that Andrew Jackson who had spent so much of a long life
fighting enemies, red and white. Fighting the Creek and the Cherokee,
fighting the British. Fighting Jesse Benton and young Charles Dickinson,
who had died after that grim, dreadful duel in Kentucky.

Rachel shut her lips tight, remembering. All for her, that hot-headed
encounter. All for her the bullet Andrew Jackson still carried so
dangerously near to his heart that it could not be removed. Jesse
Benton’s bullet had shattered the General’s arm too, so that he had
carried the arm in a sling through all the Indian war in Alabama. The
arm still ached at night when a cold wind blew.

A fighting man whose eyes too quickly kindled to blue lightnings, whose
reddish hair seemed to burn with some flame within him that was never
cooled. Her own gentle counsel could damper it down now and then, but
only briefly. Given the provocation, his temper leaped alive like a
drawn sword and he became then, his wife was thinking sadly, as
dangerous and unpredictable as one of those wild stallions that snorted
and charged about the Hermitage meadows.

The amazing contradiction about him was that in his letters, in their
quiet conversations in the big bright bedroom, he voiced only one
passionate desire: to be able to live on here quietly for the rest of
his days in this home he had built. He yearned, so he had written her so
many times, to be free of wars and politics, answerable to no one but
the call of his heart. Not to Madison nor Monroe nor any other
president. Not to Sam Houston nor Governor Billy Carroll of Tennessee,
nor even to Major John Eaton who seemed, in Rachel’s mind, to be forever
grooming Andrew Jackson for some job or other, always important, always
controversial and inevitably always far from the Hermitage.

She saw them now, riding up the drive from the muddy road, the General
and John Eaton. Her husband sat very tall and a little gaunt on the
saddle and his gray horse seemed always to sense the mood of his master
and hold his head very high. Andrew Jackson’s hair, graying a little
now, blew wildly over his ears under his beaver hat. His high collar and
stock hid the thinness of his throat.

                            * * * * * * * *

He had been such a skinny lad, Rachel Jackson remembered, when John
Overton had brought him, a stripling lawyer, to her mother’s house on
the Cumberland, in that spring of 1789. And now it was 1823! Where had
the years gone? The Widow Donelson had taken him in, and there in the
house had been Rachel, Rachel Robards then, reconciled briefly to her
violent, unpredictable husband, Lewis Robards, after a separation that
had seen Rachel vilified, discarded, and abused.

The widow had tried hard to put some meat on that lanky young lawyer’s
frame, but now, thirty-four years and four wars later, he was still too
thin, still coughed too much and was weakened by digestive distresses
from living too long on parched corn and other scanty fare.

Philip, the horse handler, came running out to take the bridles of the
mounts and even through the windowpanes Rachel could hear her husband
giving Philip orders in his high, arresting voice, the same voice that
had commanded the defeat of General Pakenham at New Orleans, shouted
defiance at Red Feather at Tohopeka and the Spanish governor at
Pensacola.

Now he came shouting into the house. “Mrs. Jackson! Mrs. Jackson! Where
are you?”

Never had they called each other by their Christian names. In letters
they wrote, “My dearest.” At home he was the General, to her, or simply
Husband. She was Mrs. Jackson, the woman he honored, adored, had fought
for and would defend fiercely till her last breath.

“Here, Husband!” She hurried out into the hall where the two men were
handing their damp cloaks to a servant. “Mr. Eaton, you are welcome as
always here. Come in to the fire.”

“Feels like snow.” John Eaton slapped his gloves against his knee, shook
moisture from his high-crowned hat. “Misting now, but it’s getting
colder. Miss Emily,”—he made a courtly bow as they entered the warm
parlor—“you grow more beautiful every day. How any young man can stay
away from you is a puzzle in my mind.”

Emily made her curtsy. “You flatter me, sir.”

“All our girls are pretty,” stated the General, moving a chair near to
the fire for his wife. “It’s the air here on this hill. We keep ’em here
as long as we can, then sometimes we have to let ’em go home to their
mothers, but not for long. Be seated, Mrs. Jackson. You look weary, my
dear.”

“She is tired,” Emily said. “She’s been putting out dishes and silver
all day, attending to the Christmas dinner. Uncle Jackson,” she began
timidly, “if Jack should ride home for Christmas—”

“He won’t,” declared the General testily, getting down his long clay
pipe from the mantelpiece. “He won’t because I wrote and gave him his
orders not to come. I told him that the important thing for him now is
to finish his schooling and get admitted to the bar. I’ve raised that
boy.” He filled the pipe and handed it to Eaton. “You smoke that, John.
I like my old corncob best. I raised that boy, Andrew Jackson Donelson.
Going to make a gentleman and a scholar out of him. He’ll have the
chance I never had, he and young Andy.”

“Jack Donelson is your nephew, Mrs. Jackson?” Eaton drew on the pipe to
which Emily held a spill she had lighted at the fire.

“My brother’s son. But we’ve had him here with us since he was four
years old. Andy, our adopted son, is my brother Severn’s boy. We took
him four days after he was born.”

“Twins,” remarked the General. “Severn’s wife was mighty frail and one
baby was all she could nurse. So we took Andy off her hands. All named
after me,” he grinned, “a whole covey of ’em, Donelsons, Hutchingses and
Hayeses.”

“I must see about supper, Mr. Jackson. You gentlemen will excuse me?”
Rachel got up too quickly and the little pain caught at her and she put
a quick hand to her breast.

“I’ll go, aunt Rachel, you sit still and rest,” Emily volunteered
quickly.

“I want her to sit here and listen to my news,” said the General,
thumbing down his pipe. “You too, Emily. Let the women attend to the
supper. About a dozen of ’em around, ought to be able to manage to feed
us.”

Rachel had turned pale. “Oh, no!” she cried. “Not Pensacola again! Not
another war. I can’t bear it. You said we’d stay at home. Mr. Jackson,
you swore we’d live here in peace in our new Hermitage.” Distress
sharpened her voice, her eyes dimmed, and she dabbed at them nervously
with a corner of her white shawl.

“Compose yourself, my dear,” comforted her husband. “This news I’ve
brought is exciting. You’ll be pleased. You’re being offered an
opportunity to go where few women have ever gone—American women,
anyway.”

“But I don’t want to go anywhere,” Rachel almost wailed. “I’ve been to
Kentucky and Florida and Washington and Natchez and New Orleans and I
hated all those places. I just want to stay in my home and I want you to
stay in it with me. Mr. Eaton, we’ve been separated more than we have
been together all these years we’ve been married, Mr. Jackson and I, and
now were both getting old.”

“Old? You call yourself old, dear lady?” protested Eaton. “Why, the best
part of your life is ahead of you.”

“It could be,” she sighed, pressing her hands together, strong,
sun-browned hands that had helped to steer a heavy boat down the Ohio
River, that had gripped the rein on many a weary ride through the
wilderness, poured lead into bullet molds when savage enemies howled
outside the stockades, spun thread, planted rosebushes, tenderly
comforted many a child. “It could be,” she repeated, “if only I could
have those years in my home with my husband.”

The General’s eyes twinkled. He rapped out his pipe on an andiron,
brushed tobacco from his tight, snuff-colored trousers.

“I’m disappointed in you, my dear,” he bantered. “Here I bring you news
that you could have a chance to cross an ocean and see a new, strange,
fascinating world, and you don’t even want to hear about it.”

“The ocean?” gasped Emily. “Oh, no, uncle Jackson!”

Rachel’s face had drained gray. She pressed both hands hard on her chest
where the pain sprang alive, shutting off her breath, making her ears
throb. Eaton half rose from his chair, looking at her uneasily.

“Stop teasing her, General,” he warned. “Tell her about President
Monroe’s magnificent offer—which you don’t mean to accept.”

Andrew Jackson took a pose on the hearth, a boyish grin lightening his
long face. Emily drew a breath of relief, laid her hand against Rachel’s
cold cheek.

“It’s all right. Uncle Jackson is just having one of his jokes.”

Rachel relaxed a little. “I don’t like jokes,” she sighed. “Not when
they scare me half to death.”

“But this is a splendid joke, my dear,” insisted her husband. “John and
I laughed about it all the way home—especially we laughed at what
Secretary Adams said about it. President Monroe has offered to send me
as ambassador to Russia.”

“Russia!” both women cried at once.

“But you aren’t going, uncle Jackson?” Emily asked when the silence had
stretched too long. “Why, it’s thousands and thousands of miles away!
They have wolves there and snow all the year—I read it in a book.”

Rachel had never had time to read many books. There had always been too
much to do. Russia was as vague, as far, and as uncivilized as China or
Africa in her gentle mind. She sat rigidly waiting.

“I am not going to Russia,” announced the General finally.

“What was it Secretary Adams said?” Emily asked.

Jackson’s laughter pealed. “When the idea was talked about in Washington
and Monroe proposed to the cabinet to send me over there—to get me out
of the country, my love. That’s his motive and I’m not at all deceived
by the flattering language of the letter of invitation. I know what
James Monroe had in mind. Your husband is a disturbing influence in
these United States. Mrs. Jackson,”—he leaned over and gave her a tweak
on her soft arm—“your husband stirs up fights.”

“Marches an army in Florida and sets the governor back on his haunches,”
put in Eaton. “Beats a British army with a little handful of farmers and
hunters. And pirates! A dangerous man, Mrs. Jackson. He licked the
Creeks and the Cherokee and made this southwest safe to live in. And
there are some people who are talking around among themselves that
Andrew Jackson ought to be President of the United States.”

“Well, he can’t be!” said Rachel firmly. “I won’t hear of it. He’s not
strong nor well, you know that, John Eaton. He can’t even eat plain
victuals half the time, and he coughs at night no matter how much salve
I rub on his chest. Besides,”—she got to her feet, smoothing out her
black silk skirt—“I don’t want to live in any palace—anywhere! Not in
Russia. Not in Washington. I’d rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
the Lord than to live in the finest palace ever was.”

“You haven’t told us what Secretary Adams said,” persisted Emily.

“It was really a compliment,” Eaton told them, “though I doubt if Adams
intended it that way. He listened to the president’s proposal and
snorted. He snorts very eloquently, the little man. ‘Send Andrew Jackson
to represent this country in the court of the Czar,’ said he, ‘and that
would be the end of peace with Russia!’”

The girl’s laughter rippled. She flew across the room and kissed the
General’s chin. “You quarrelsome old thing! What a pity they don’t know
you as we know you, that soft heart you carry around under all those
medals—and bristles!”

He kissed her, then pushed her away, his mouth set firmly. “Flattery
will get you nothing, young woman! I am not going to let Jack Donelson
come home for Christmas. A long trip for a few days’ visit. He spends
too much now, the young rascal. All these youngsters,” he told Eaton,
“think the old man is made of money. Thirteen-cent cotton and shippers
take more than half of that. Sell a fine colt and you get less than the
worth of the hay to raise him.”

“You shouldn’t have bought all that expensive furniture, Mr. Jackson,”
worried Rachel. “We could have got along with what we had.”

“We lived in a log blockhouse then. Haven’t you earned a decent bed to
sleep in, my dear, after thirty-two years of putting up with me?”

“But if the children need the money—” Rachel always spoke of her
numerous nieces and nephews who considered the Hermitage their part-time
home as “the children.”

“They just think they need it. Including you, my spoiled pet.” He gave
Emily a pinch, ignoring her downcast face. “All spoiled, the whole pack
of you. Young Andy worst of all. Where is that scalawag, anyway? And
where’s supper? Are we supposed to fast till Christmas? I’ve smelled
cakes baking around this place for days and get set down to boiled meat
and hominy. Right now I could eat a hog, tail, squeal, and all.”

“I’ll see if it’s ready, Uncle.” Emily hurried out.

The General looked sharply at his wife. “Don’t encourage this
foolishness, my dear! That boy has got to buckle down to his law. Andy
too, as soon as he’s old enough.”

“Those two—Miss Emily and your nephew—are in love?” asked Eaton.

“I hope not. After all, they are first cousins.”

Rachel said nothing. Her gentle face, with the round, firm chin, the
dark eyes that held too often a brooding look under arched brows, grew
thoughtful. Young love could be so beautiful! Oh, she knew! She knew!
Never through all these years of struggle and anxiety and separation had
her own love faltered for this stormy, dynamic, explosive man who was
her husband. His word was law, but even a just law could be harsh when
it bruised what was young and sweet and trusting.

She went quietly out of the room and John Eaton watched her go, saw a
troubled look darken the General’s long face. A face hewn from a hickory
log, General Coffee had said once, at New Orleans. Only the eyes could
tolerate pain and now they darkened with hurt, following Rachel.

“A sorrow—a great sorrow that she has no children of her own,” he said.
“All her family—prolific all of them. Her mother bore ten children but
her daughter has none. So she has to mother a whole tribe and suffer
every small disappointment with them. These lads—Andrew Jackson
Donelson, young Andy and Andrew Hutchings are sons to her—to me too. The
problem is that I have to hurt her with my firmness to make men out of
them. Too much softness in the Donelson strain. I have been blessed by
it, but now I must fight against it and defeat it in those boys. It’s
not easy to do, John, not for a man who loves his wife as I love Rachel
Jackson.”

“You did not tell all your news, General.”

Andrew Jackson shook his head. “Let her enjoy her Christmas. We’ve had
mighty few of them together.”

A bell rang outside, and the General looked in dismay at his hands.
“Supper’s ready and I forgot to wash. Come along with me, John. You,
George!” He raised his voice in a shout. “Come here and mend this fire.
Feels like snow!”




                                   2


Her room under the eaves of the Hermitage was big and bright. The walls
were covered with paper in a small, gay design; there were ruffled
curtains at the windows. They looked down on the meadow where even on
this chilly morning Andrew Jackson’s mares and colts picked at the
frosty grass, lifting their heads now and then to watch for Philip to
come trudging down from the stables to pour buckets of water and grain
into the feeding troughs.

Later, Emily knew, every animal would be led back to the barns to be
brushed and polished ready to meet the General’s critical eye.

The room was chilly. She had not bothered to light the fire laid on the
hearth. She had delayed too long sitting up in her warm feather bed, a
shawl around her shoulders, reading and rereading the letter. It made
her heart beat quickly and her cheeks burn to read it, and when she
pressed it against her heart it seemed to glow there, warming her all
over.

He loved her! In stiff, formal, slightly legal language he had written
it, plain to see, and the words danced before her eyes and got into her
blood and did pirouettes there like little live things with silver bells
on their feet. Lovely words! She kissed the letter now and then hid it
inside her Bible that lay on the table beside the bed. What a pity that
so much that was beautiful and wonderful must be hidden or face the
chilly breath of adult disapproval!

“If you marry your own cousin all your children will be idiots,” the
older people said, looking sombre, so desperately certain that they were
right. They were the elders and knew the truth as young people could not
be assumed to know it, not having lived long enough for experience to
lay its cold blight upon them.

“I gave Andrew Jackson Donelson orders not to come home,” her uncle
Jackson had said. The thrill in Emily’s heart was touched by panic now
as she hurried into her clothes. Her chemise, chilly and crisp, the
cramping stays, the long white ruffled drawers and petticoats. Her
fingers were clumsy with cold and dread as she struggled with the
fastenings. For Jack was coming! Already he was on the way. He must be
riding southward on that road from Kentucky this minute, school left
behind him—forever, the letter said.

He knew where he was needed, he had written. Aunt Jackson needed him. So
would the General.

“Circumstances have arisen that will make it needful for our uncle to
have assistance,” ran the letter. “So I shall return to offer my aid and
I hope at that time that it will be proper for me to make my addresses
to your family, my dear Emily, and request your hand in marriage.
Farewell, then, my love, till I enter the gate at the Hermitage.”

There would be some kind of furious explosion of displeasure from uncle
Jackson, she knew. He would be wrathy at being disobeyed, but her
experience with the tempestuous old warrior led Emily to hope faintly
that eventually he would give in. Especially if aunt Rachel should shed
a few tears. That was his history, storming, shouting orders and
blasting somebody with angry words, then softening instantly if he saw a
look of hurt in Rachel Jackson’s eyes.

Breakfast, when the General was away, was usually a quiet meal at the
Hermitage. Rachel never slept very well and rose, still and determined,
setting about the multitude of tasks before her, level-eyed and grave.
But when Andrew Jackson was at home there was hubbub. He was always
noisy and impatient in the mornings, eating rapidly, summoning one
servant after another to give orders about the cattle, the horses, the
winter plowing. Negroes hurried in, stood hat in hand listening
obediently. There was bedlam in the dining room when Emily went down on
this morning of Christmas Eve.

“Mix some bran with the oats for those nursing mares,” uncle Jackson was
barking at Philip.

“Yes, sah, Mista Jackson. That Truxton filly, she got sore foots. You
want me to put tar and grease on her foots, sah?”

“Don’t get it too hot. You blistered all the hair off last time. Here!”
Jackson slapped a piece of ham between the halves of a huge biscuit and
handed it to the slave. “Eat that and get moving.”

“Yes, sah. Thank you, sah.”

“I need somebody around this place to take some of these chores off me,”
grumbled the General. “You, boy!” He glared at Andrew, Junior, who was
wolfing down a plateful of egg. “You go see to that filly’s feet. Got to
learn. Got to learn some time.”

Young Andrew’s sensitive mouth jerked and his great eyes looked uneasy.
“It’s raining, Papa,” he protested.

“It may turn to snow. It felt very raw to me when I went out to the
dairy this morning,” Rachel put in gently.

“It rained on me at Fort Mimms and Chalmette,” snapped Andrew Jackson.
“You have ridden miles in the rain, my love—so has this fellow! What are
you, son, a lump of salt that a little rain can dissolve you? Or are you
a paper man cut out to dance on a string while somebody picks a banjo?”

“No, Papa, I’ll go.” The boy hastily wiped his lips. “But Philip won’t
pay any attention to me. He’ll just tell me to keep out of the way of
that mare’s heels.”

“Make him obey you! How are you going to be master of this place when
I’m gone if you can’t win the respect of the people? I may not be here
much longer. I never thought to live long enough to sleep under this
roof. Put that stuff on your wrist and be sure it’s not too hot.”

“You’ve been going to die before spring ever since I can remember, uncle
Jackson,” teased Emily, when the boy had gone out.

“It’s that cold he gets in his chest every time he gets wet,” Rachel
said. “And you get it too and so does Andy.”

“Let him get toughened up then,” growled the General. “You spoil all
these young ones, my dear. Andy will have heavy responsibilities when
I’m gone. He has to be trained to meet them. I’ve done fairly well with
Andrew Jackson Donelson for all you women trying continually to soften
him up. He’ll make a man.”

Emily’s heart was a bit happier. Uncle Jackson did need someone to help
him, as Jack had written. She hoped that when Jack arrived, when the
storm of her uncle’s ire had subsided, that the General would welcome
young Jack’s assistance. Inevitably, it was certain, the General would
be off again on some public service or other. He protested, he fumed,
but always, when he was convinced that the call came from the people, he
obeyed, and Rachel would be left alone again with the burden of this big
plantation.

The slaves were willing but aunt Rachel was too soft with them, as she
was too gentle, by the General’s standards, with the young people who
surrounded her. She was continually protesting the overseer’s decisions,
protecting shirkers and malcontents from punishment. She was too
indulgent with young Andy—a spoiled boy already who, his cousin was
convinced, was never going to learn the value of money.

Rachel excused herself now and hurried out—to see that the boy was
adequately protected from the weather, Emily suspected. She would wrap
him in coats and scarfs and when he returned from the pasture or the
stable he would be put to bed, his feet soaked in hot mustard water and
a plaster of goose grease and pepper on his chest if he so much as
sneezed. Jack would be out there, seeing to the mares, without being
told, his sweetheart believed worshipfully. Jack would be a great help
to aunt Rachel.

“I’ll do my own room, aunt Rachel,” she called, as she went back through
the house. “The girls have so much to do today.”

In the big buttery Rachel turned the keys in her hands anxiously. “I
declare I keep forgetting how many people you counted, Emily.”

“I counted fifty-two, but with the weather so bad some of them might not
get here. You know how awful the roads get when it rains very long. I
wish it hadn’t rained today. I was going to have the boys cut some
greens for me and decorate the house. There’s a big holly tree out there
beyond the tulip grove covered with red berries.”

“Send George,” her aunt suggested. “Mr. Jackson gave George his old
oilskin coat and a pair of boots. You could put holly on the
mantelpieces. It would look right pretty but it would dry out mighty
quick, I’m afraid. Emily, do you reckon Mr. Jackson has any idea of
going to Russia? My patience, that would be a terrible place to go!”

“He said he had refused the appointment, aunt Rachel.”

“I know. But he refused to be governor of Florida too, and first thing I
knew here I was packing to go to Pensacola. Emily, all I ask is so
little—just to be allowed to stay in my home with my husband and my
family. I don’t suit proud places. Sometimes I feel that Mr. Jackson
must be ashamed of me.”

“Nonsense, aunt Rachel!” Emily gave the quivering figure a quick hug.
“Uncle Jackson thinks you are perfect.”

“I wish I wasn’t getting so fat! It shortens my breath so.”

In her own room Emily quickly made her bed and hung her clothes away in
the big wardrobe. Then she sat at the window again to read her letter.
Words she had passed over lightly before in her happy daze now leaped
out to trouble her. “Circumstances that have arisen,” Jack had written.
A cold kind of prescience oppressed the girl, shot through with a
breathless excitement, as though she had heard a trumpet blow.

It had come to her that there was always about Andrew Jackson that
atmosphere of great events impending. Always when he seemed most
intimate, familiar and dear, there was a cloak of aloofness shutting him
in, a remote and dedicated sort of mystery. As though even when he was
thinking homely thoughts—a lame mare, a fire that needed replenishing—he
was listening to some far, calling drum. As though never could he belong
entirely to this Hermitage, this woman that he loved, the young people
he scolded and indulged impartially. Emily was very young and a trifle
naïve, but there was a wisdom deep in her that recognized the destiny
that cloaked this man she loved like a garment of silver, and her young
mind dreaded it even while it thrilled her.

She remembered John Eaton’s words, that people were saying that Andrew
Jackson should be President of the United States. She remembered, too,
aunt Rachel’s positive declaration that this he could not be! No palaces
for her, she had announced—but had there been a tinge of desperation in
that declaration? Did aunt Rachel feel the pressure of destiny too, that
remote glory that invested her man on horseback?

It would be exciting, Emily was thinking, to live in that new
president’s palace in Washington. The British had burned it in
retaliation for the sack of Toronto by the American forces, but it had
been rebuilt, finer than ever, she had heard, and now it was as
important as Buckingham Palace. Aunt Rachel had no wish to be a queen in
a palace. Only too well Emily knew that aunt Rachel would be an unhappy
queen.

“But I would love it!” she said suddenly aloud.

Silks and satins, servants bowing, diplomats with medals and ribbons on
their gleaming shirt bosoms, sentries and bands playing, her thoughts
raced and thrilled.

If only she and Jack could be guests in that palace! It was wonderful
even to think about. She sat in a roseate dream for a chilly half hour,
while her own fate hovered near, unfathomed. The fate that would make
her, Emily Donelson, a young queen in a palace—and an unhappy queen!




                                   3


On Christmas Eve the servants all grew tense and garrulous with
excitement. The field workers, freed from toil for three days, were in
and out of their cabins, hanging around the kitchen door till Betty’s
sharp tongue sent them packing. The rain had ended but the day was bleak
and cloudy with the air bringing a threat of snow. But a wind rose and
though it whined in the great chimneys and sent whorls of smoke and
ashes drifting out into the rooms, Rachel was grateful for the wind.

At least it would dry up the mud so that the rutted, marshy road out to
the Hermitage would be passable for the carriages and wagons of the
Christmas guests. Some who had a long way to come would arrive before
night, and there was a frantic activity of black women airing blankets,
ironing the stored dampness out of bed linen, making down pallets in the
upper rooms and even in the hall. George lugged in ticks freshly stuffed
with hay and these were beaten flat with whacking brooms before feather
beds and quilts were spread over them.

The long tables in the dining room were set with the second-best linen
and china. The ceremonial draping with the finest cloths would wait for
Christmas morning. In the cellar the General and black Joey counted
bottles of Madeira, of good Jamaica rum and peach brandy, broached
charred kegs of whisky pounding in spigots, filling jugs that would be
set out for the holiday “dram” for every slave on the plantation.

In the smokehouse Rachel directed the slicing of the heavy slabs of fat
middling that would go, one to every cabin. There would be a chicken for
each family too, and this year every hand on the place would be measured
for a new pair of shoes. The shoemaker would come and stay for weeks and
the smell of the cured hides would be heavy on the air, but at least
every one of the more than a hundred black feet would be shod. That was
the big worry for Rachel, shoes. In summer the field hands preferred to
trudge behind a plow or drag a cotton sack barefooted, but in winter the
frosty ground brought chills and lung fevers and there was an endless
sound of coughing in the quarters and inevitably some of the people
died.

A fearful responsibility, all these black souls, but today they were all
happy and noisy, adding to the confusion in the house by their laughter
and singing—singing hushed whenever the voice of the master was heard
belowstairs but begun again as soon as a door slammed on him.

In her room Emily lovingly folded the Christmas gift she had knitted for
Jack Donelson. A crimson muffler with stripes and a fringe of bright
blue at either end. It narrowed a little in the middle where she had
knitted a bit too tight, but she stretched it to make it even before she
wrapped it in a square of white paper and tied it with a ribbon bow,
sticking a tiny bunch of holly jauntily on top. She had gifts for aunt
Rachel and uncle Jackson too, linen handkerchiefs she had hemstitched
with neat, tiny stitches, then washed and bleached and ironed, with Sary
standing around to keep the irons hot. She wrapped these too, along with
the gifts for her own family, aware of the curious eyes of the two girls
who were making an extra bed in the corner of the room. Some of the
cousins would sleep in here, likely enough two of them with her in her
own bed.

They would giggle and whisper about their beaus half the night and ply
her with questions that she would evade, quite certain that she was
fooling no one. She and Jack were a family anxiety, she knew. It was all
part of that silly old superstition that cousins should not marry. Jack
had more brains than all his relatives put together, she was fiercely
certain; he was the cleverest and steadiest of all the Donelson clan; he
was almost as smart as uncle Jackson. How could a brilliant young man
like Jack have children that were idiots?

“And I’m not a stupid fool either!” she said suddenly, aloud.

The women, shaking out quilts, broke into delighted laughter. “No, Miss
Emily, you sho’ ain’t no fool,” cried the older one, “You about the
smartest white Miss we got, savin’ Mis’ Rachel herself.”

“Thank you, ’Relia. Don’t use that pillowcase. It’s got a rip in the
seam.”

“Hit the very las’ one, Miss Emily. Done use every pillowcase Mis’
Jackson got.”

“Give it to me then. I’ll mend it. We can’t have guests sleeping on
rags.”

“Not Miss Mary Eastin, no ways. She want everything mighty fine. Best we
got ain’t none too good for Miss Mary.”

“Oh, Mary will sleep with me. She always does.”

“Her hair mighty pretty. Smooth and shiny as a new colt. Got a nice long
nose too.”

“We’ve all got long noses. It’s the Donelson curse. Mine’s longest of
all. All of us but aunt Rachel. Somehow it passed her by,” sighed Emily,
threading a needle.

“Ain’t flat like mine, anyhow,” ’Relia echoed the sigh. “If the good
Lord was to give me my dearest wish it would be to have a nice long nose
like you got, Miss Emily.”

“Ain’t nobody satisfy,” stated Becky, the other maid. “White folks all
wantin’ hair be curly. Colored folks all putting grease on they hair,
make it straight. You reckon we be white when we git to Heaven, Miss
Emily?”

“Law, we be angels with big white wings,” declared ’Relia. “Lord don’t
want no black angels around, he got to make us white. I wants me a pyure
white robe, white as Mis’ Rachel’s tablecloth. I goin’ put on my robe
and sing praises to the Throne, day and night.”

“Are you going to sing tonight, Becky—all of you? It wouldn’t be
Christmas if you people didn’t build a big fire out there behind the
smokehouse and all gather round and sing.”

“Look a little like snow,” said Becky, peering out the window. Becky
hated the cold. She burned more wood in her cabin than any other servant
on the place, Emily had heard her aunt complain. From the window now she
could see the wagon coming down the lane loaded with firewood, George
walking beside the team, cracking his whip and shouting. Great fires
would roar in every fireplace in the house, over the holidays. Rachel
Jackson was nervous about fire. Someday the General was going to burn
the Hermitage to the ground, she was always prophesying.[1]

A carriageload of cousins and aunts arrived shortly after the family had
finished dinner, and there was a confusion of greetings, band boxes and
parcels to be carried in, shawls, bonnets and cloaks laid off to be hung
up by maids, cold hands and feet to be warmed by the fires, the scurry
of excited children. Then all the food had to be warmed up and brought
in again and the guests fed.

Emily hurried about, setting out plates, getting down glasses for the
General, who insisted that everyone must have a tot of hot spiced rum to
ward off a chill. She had little chance to slip to the front of the
house to watch the drive from the windows, but while the company were
eating, with Rachel hovering around and the General being the affable
host, she did steal away to stand behind the long curtains, searching
the approaching avenue anxiously.

Dusk was beginning to gather under the great trees. The smoke from the
many chimneys eddied and settled to the ground. A few thin snowflakes
drifted by on the wind, then drops of rain spattered the windowpanes.
Bad weather for a young man riding alone. So many things could happen on
a long journey. A horse stumbling at a ford, footpads on the road lying
in wait for a solitary traveler, even the danger from Indians was not
ended.

She was growing more tense with anxiety by the minute but she must not
betray her unease, must keep her demeanor calm and be most surprised of
all when Jack came riding in, or her uncle would never forgive her for
hiding her letter. She had let the curtains fall when Andrew, Junior,
came up behind her.

“Who you watching for, Emmy?”

She managed a light laugh. “Anybody! I hope if more are coming tonight
they’ll get here before dark. We’d better light the candles. It’s going
to be a gloomy night.”

“George is getting his fire going,” Andy looked from the window. “I
suppose I’ll have to go out and help Papa dole out the Christmas Eve
gifts all around. Looky yonder, the people are coming out with their
cups and mugs and sacks already! You’ll have to light the candles,
Emily. I’ve got to go out and be Young Marse Jackson.”

“It’s an honor, Andy. There are a lot of Donelson boys. You were the one
chosen.”

“I know. It’s hard to live up to sometimes, ’specially when Jack’s
around. I know he’s smarter than I am and Jack’s a fool for work and
duty as I get reminded all the time.”

“You mustn’t be jealous. After all, they did pick you to be their son
and heir. You’ll have everything, being Andrew Jackson’s son.”

“You have to admit, though, that Papa’s a hard man to follow. Came up
from the direst kind of poverty, made it all for himself. I hear that
too. And how he got thrown into that prison where his brother died,
because he wouldn’t black some British officer’s boots.”

“He was no older than you are now, then, Andy. He’s just trying to
inspire you. You’d better hurry. I hear the cellar door slamming. That
means uncle Jackson and Joey are fetching out the jugs. Oh, Heaven,
there’s aunt Rachel out there without her cloak! I’ll get it before she
takes a chill. Run, Andy!”

Under the big trees all the Negroes on the place were gathering. George
had persuaded the big bonfire to burn in spite of the thin, misting
rain. Children, black and white, crowded close to it, their voices
shrill with excitement. Little Negro boys poked sticks into the blazing
fire, waved them smoking in air, dancing about till Betty laid about her
with a switch, ordering the brands extinguished.

“You set the young Misses’ dresses afire,” she screamed at them.

On long trestles the parcels of meat were laid out and the chickens,
tied by the feet and squawking, were brought from the chicken house and
handed around, one hen or rooster to a family. Instantly there was a
bedlam of screaming joy, chickens’ necks being wrung, cries of, “Thank
you, Massa, thank you, Mist’iss!” The General with Andy beside him and
Joey at hand to lift a jug stood at the end of the table. A line formed,
cups in hand.

“No crowding now—and no sneaking back to the end of the line for a
second drink!” warned Andrew Jackson.

Headless chickens flopped on the ground, prodded by shrieking little
Negroes with sticks. Emily wrapped a heavy cloak around her aunt’s
shoulders, pulled her own shawl tighter as they watched the line of
people file by to receive their portion of Christmas cheer. Even the
small ones got a tot, weakened with water, and as each child passed
Andrew Jackson tweaked a lock of kinky hair or pulled an ear, sending
the small black person off into a hysteria of shrieks and giggles.

George had put a great washpot over the flames and when the water was
hot the women would douse their fowls in the steaming cauldron and there
would be a great chattering and ripping off of feathers, but before that
all the people would gather in a phalanx to sing.

“We must go in and light all the candles,” Emily told a group of women.
“The house must be bright when they sing.”

“You go, Emily,” Rachel said. “I ought to stay here. Becky and Dilsey
both wanted that white rooster and they’re sure to get into a fight.”

“Let Mr. Field attend to it. It’s his business to keep the people in
order, aunt Rachel. You are a hostess with a houseful of guests, you
have enough to worry you.”

Rachel went reluctantly into the house, and presently every room was
ablaze with firelight and candlelight. The other women and children
drifted in, and Andy came too, standing before the fire balancing
uneasily on first one foot, then the other.

“Mama,” he began abruptly, “you know Papa said he was going to give me
that chestnut colt. Why can’t he give it to me for Christmas? He gave
Jack the sorrel and promised the chestnut to me when it was grown. Now
every time I speak to Philip about it he says it’s not old enough to
break yet. A two-year-old colt ought to be old enough to break to the
saddle. You know that, Mama.”

Rachel looked harassed. “Son, Philip knows about the horses more than I.
Your Papa has every confidence in Philip’s judgment. You have horses to
ride. Good safe horses too. And that new saddle and bridle and
everything. Goodness knows they cost plenty.”

“You’re too young to ride a stallion colt, Andy,” put in one of his
Donelson aunts.

“I should ride some old bag of bones like Duke, I suppose?” flared the
boy.

“Duke is a noble old horse,” stated Rachel sternly. “He carried your
Papa through two wars. He’s earned his rest and feed.”

“And he still pays for his keep by dancing on three feet whenever
anybody whistles ‘Yankee Doodle’,” laughed Emily. “Andy, you’re only
fourteen. Plenty of time for you to wrestle fractious stallion colts.”

“You could be killed,” worried his mother, “and you’ve got to live to
comfort me in my old age. Sometimes I feel like it’s coming on mighty
fast.”

“Nonsense, Rachel, you’ve got twenty good years ahead of you,” argued
one of her sisters-in-law, “and all the struggle is behind. This fine
house now—and everything fine in it and all the worry behind you.”

“If only they don’t decide that Mr. Jackson has to save the country in
some other awful place far from home!” sighed Rachel. “I declare, with
millions of men now in this country there ought to be enough to keep it
going peacefully without Mr. Jackson being dragged away from this place
again.”

“The trouble is,” remarked the other woman, “that Andrew Jackson was
never born for peace. Not that he starts any trouble but the minute
anything does start Andrew is the man they look for to put an end to
it.”

“He’d start a fight soon enough if anybody picked on Mama,” declared
Andy. “He’s done that already. That’s why he’s carrying that bullet
around right close to his heart.”

“Andy!” protested Emily, shocked at the quick whitening of Rachel’s
face.

The Dickinson duel was never spoken of in her presence.

“That was very bad taste, Andy,” reproved his aunt, “and you should know
better.”

“But it’s true!” protested the boy, his voice breaking in a contralto
tremolo. “Even when I was little, boys used to yell at me that my father
had killed a man—on account of Mama.”

Rachel walked away quickly and they heard the door of her room close.

“Andy, how dreadful—on Christmas Eve!” scolded an aunt, “I’ll go—”

“No,” urged Emily, “she’ll want to be alone, aunt Mary. But I’m ashamed
of Andy.”

“Everybody picks on me,” mourned the boy.

“Go outside and help your father. And remember that there are things
never mentioned in your mother’s presence. One of them is Charles
Dickinson and that tragic duel that happened before you were ever born.”

“Papa did kill him!”

“My boy, I hope that when you are grown a man you will find a woman as
fine and faithful as Rachel Jackson,” said the older woman gravely. “If
you are so fortunate as to win a wife like that and a man cast slurs on
her in public, I think you will be moved to kill him too. Now go on out
of here before I get the itch to box your ears, big as you are!”




                                   4


In her room Rachel stood before her tall chest, her hands shaking, her
throat cramping with an agonizing pain. Always in spring, when all about
was new growth and beauty burgeoning the old terror twenty years past
came back for a little to haunt her. Now Andy’s callous taunts had
brought it again out of its grave to tear at her tender heart.

Always it was the same. She saw herself again sitting in the carriage
beside that race track where the General’s fine horse Truxton, and a
horse called Ploughboy owned by Charles Dickinson and his father were
running a race. Gathered around the course was an enormous concourse of
people: the women in carriages and on horseback wearing their new spring
bonnets gay with flowers and ribbons, or flowing habits of bright
velvet; the men jaunty in tight breeches strapped under their ankles,
ruffled shirts and tall beaver hats. An April wind was blowing sweet off
the fields.

It was all as sharply clear to Rachel, here in her big room dimly
lighted by one candle, as it had been on that fateful day when Truxton
had gone lame in the third heat of the race.

She could even hear again her own voice saying naïvely and more loudly
than she had intended, “If Truxton hadn’t gone lame he would have left
Ploughboy out of sight.”

She could hear too that loud, sneering voice that still crackled in her
ears though the young man who had spoken had lain twenty years in his
grave. Angry and raucous from a bit too much drink, Charles Dickinson
had shouted, “About as far out of sight as Mrs. Jackson left her first
husband when she ran off with the General!”

It comforted her still to remember that she had not been the one who
repeated that jeering insult to Andrew Jackson. But there had been many
ready to turn the knife in an old wound, to drag out again and bandy
about the old, sordid story of Lewis Robards, who had married Rachel and
discarded her, of the aborted divorce that had clouded Rachel Robards
Jackson’s second marriage.

A chill ran over her body now as she remembered the furious, insulting
letters that had been written, the General’s cold terrible rage, the
town and county taking sides, eventually the irrevocable challenge. Her
hands shook as she opened a drawer in the chest. Well hidden there under
lavender-scented linen lay the browning copy of a paper that Andrew
Jackson would have destroyed instantly, had he known that she still
hoarded it. It was dated on the 23rd of May, 1806, and the lines that
were hastily scrawled upon it were burned on Rachel Jackson’s heart.

_On Friday, the 30th. Inst, we agree to meet at Harrison’s Mills, in Red
River County, State of Kentucky for the Purpose of settling an Affair of
Honor, between Andrew Jackson and_ _Charles Dickinson, Esq. Further
arrangements to be made. It is understood that the Meeting will be held
at seven o’clock in the morning._

It was signed with the General’s familiar scrawl and the neater hand of
young Dickinson.

Charles Dickinson had been so young! Rachel ached now with remembering
the anguish of dread for her own beloved and for the young wife and baby
of the youth Andrew Jackson had set out across the Kentucky line that
May morning to kill, if he could—if he were not himself slain by a youth
known to be one of the most famous shots in Tennessee.

Duels were illegal in Tennessee so Jackson had started the day before
with his friend, John Overton, for the long ride into Kentucky. He had
tried to slip away without Rachel’s knowledge, tried to belittle the
danger. And he had come home with a bullet close to his heart, too near
to be safely removed by the surgeons, and that bullet he carried yet.
But Charles Dickinson had been brought home dead and for a year the town
had seethed with furious criticism of the man who had survived that
duel, Andrew Jackson. The affair had almost ended his public career.
Rachel had known some moments when she wished that the tragedy had made
it impossible for Andrew Jackson ever to be chosen for any high emprise
again.

It had weighed heavily on her heart for years that the affair had been
on her account, and there had been a long, unspoken family pact that the
duel was never to be mentioned. She had nursed her husband for weeks
through that hot summer, and he had hated the inactivity while Rachel
was grateful that the spring ran cool and deep and the great trees gave
comforting shade, and that she had her husband, wounded and restless as
he was, by her side. He had not desired that tragic engagement, she
knew. Faced with no honorable means of evading it, he had fought fairly
according to the rules and borne his wound without capitalizing upon it.

She put away the old agreement, smoothed her hair and the lace of her
collar, rubbed a bit of cotton dipped in rice powder over her swollen
eyelids. This was Christmas Eve, the past was past, though Truxton’s
colts still ambled over the meadows, some of them growing old as the
Jacksons were growing old. Perhaps they would have no more Christmas
Eves under this roof, this proud house that they loved. Nothing must mar
this holiday. She would hurry out and tell Andy that he was forgiven.
The boy was impulsive and thoughtless. He had not meant to wound her.

The house was full of voices; children being led upstairs to bed
reluctant and protesting, but outside were voices too, the songs of the
black people gathered to sing to their master and mistress. Rachel
snatched up a shawl, wrapped her head and shoulders in it and went out
to stand and listen.

“_Christmas is a-comin’, the goose is getting fat._

“_Please to put a penny in the ole man’s hat_,” caroled the slaves.

She saw her husband standing bareheaded near the fire, his hair blowing
in the winter wind, the firelight casting deep shadows under his eyes.
He had a hand on Andy’s shoulder, an arm around Emily. No one heeded the
mist that blew on the wind. Some of the older women were already picking
their chickens on the lee side of the smokehouse.

“_Go down, Moses, ’way down in Egypt’s lan’_,” trilled a high voice,
Becky’s. The humming chorus swelled, burst into tremendous melody.
“_Tell ole Phar’oh,—let my people go!_”

Go down, Moses! Go down, Andrew Jackson! To Tohopeka, to Mobile, to New
Orleans, to Pensacola. Go down, Andrew Jackson, and set a people free!
No, no, moaned the heart of Rachel. Never any more. This was home, this
was their Hermitage, this was Christmas Eve. Her eyes searched the air,
challenged the air, the Heavens, as though somewhere out there in the
murky dark lurked fate in wait for them, a prescience that would not
lift.

Was it a charm or a curse that invested her man on horseback? What dark
Nemesis had hovered over that little cabin back in the North Carolina
sandhills where he had been born? What strange power had preserved him
when all his family succumbed to the hardships of that time of bitter
war? What power of destiny had brought him up, an orphaned waif, led him
through so many conflicts, made him a firebrand and a leader whom men
would follow as they followed a flag?

Sick and coughing, his frail health her constant anxiety, he inspired
strong men. Something was brewing now. Rachel felt it, but she must hold
her tongue and quiet her unease with the drug of hope.

A horse came trotting up the drive and Rachel saw Emily start forward
eagerly. Then the girl stopped as a slim figure in oilskin slid from the
saddle.

“It’s Ralph!” Rachel hurried forward to greet the young artist, Ralph
Earl. Off and on, for many years, the portrait painter had made his home
at the Hermitage. He had done a fine portrait of the General, wooed and
won Jane Caffrey, Rachel’s niece. There had been a fine wedding in the
old log house that still stood there in the yard, but gentle Jane had
lived only a year. Now Earl was a saddened and lonely man and Rachel
mothered him after her habit with all young, unmothered creatures. “How
fine that you got back from the East for Christmas, Ralph!” she cried,
taking his hand.

“I came to paint your picture,” he said. “The General will never give me
any peace till I do your portrait, aunt Rachel.”

“Fiddlesticks!” She led him into the house. “You come get warm and dry
this minute before you take a ptisic. I’ll make a hot toddy for you,
myself. And you don’t want to paint a picture of a fat old woman like
me. Nobody would look at it. We’d have to hang it in the wash-house.”

“A portrait of you might be hung on the walls of some very splendid
place, aunt Rachel,” Earl argued, handing his damp garments to a
servant.

She looked at him in sudden alarm. “Now whatever do you mean by that?”

“Oh—just an idea I had,” he soothed, seeing her perturbation. “People
keep getting notions about what Andrew Jackson could do for this
country. I hear about them—traveling around.”

She clutched at his arm. “No, Ralph—whatever their notions are, he’s not
going to go dashing off again on some wild adventure or other. He’s not
strong, you know that. He’ll get that lung fever again and it almost
caused his death last winter. And besides,”—her eyes misted and her
voice croaked—“he’d have to leave our home! Our Hermitage!”

“But think of what great things could happen to you, aunt Rachel!
Someday you might be one of the greatest ladies in the land.”

“I don’t want to be a great lady.” She held tight to the cold hand he
had laid upon her cheek. “I want to stay here and raise young Andy and
Andrew Hutchings. I want to see Emily well married and all our people
taken care of. I never want to have to go dragging out again to make
calls and leave cards and smile till my face aches. I have had enough of
that.”

“Just the same I’m going to paint your portrait,” he insisted.

“You paint Emily. She’s filling out, she’s going to be a beauty. The
General’s got that little picture of me that Anna Peale painted the year
of that New Orleans battle. He carries it around with him all the time,
though he wrote to me once and said he didn’t need it, that he had my
picture engraved on his heart. Nobody could ask for anything more
beautiful than that, Ralph, no woman alive. He wouldn’t engrave a
picture of me as I am now, on his heart—an old lady getting fat and out
of breath!”

“I think he would,” said Earl. “I think he would prize any picture of
you, aunt Rachel, more than his life.”

“He’s coming in,” she whispered. “I must get his bed warm so he won’t
cough all night. You’ll have to sleep with Andy tonight. We’ve got a
houseful already and more coming. And Ralph, don’t you let the General
get notions about rushing off to be somebody important. It’s time he
took care of himself.”

“I’ll tell him, aunt Rachel. But you know Andrew Jackson. If any call
came from the people to serve anywhere, no one could hold him.”

“No,” she said sadly. “Not even I!”




                                   5


Bugles and drums before dawn had trained Andrew Jackson to waken early.
He tiptoed about in the dark, cracking a toe and muttering in
irritation, fumbled into his clothes by the lingering glow of a dying
fire, not wanting to light a candle and wake Rachel.

Then he discovered that she was already gone from the bed, her full
ruffled night rail was spread out neatly to air, her cap perched on the
post of the bed. Instantly his voice rose in the familiar falsetto
shout.

“You, George! Get in here and mend this fire!”

The alacrity with which the man appeared, loaded to the chin with
lightwood, betrayed that he had been waiting near for a summons. “Yes,
sah, Gin’ral Jackson! Christmas gif’, sah!”

“Christmas gift! I’ll gift you with my boot if you don’t stir yourself.”

“Yes, sah!” George burst into delighted chuckles. He knew his master
well. “Mist’iss say, don’t disturb Marse Jackson, she say, let Marse
Jackson git he rest. I git a fine fire here toreckly.”

The embers stirred, the lightwood crackled and flamed. Andrew Jackson
liked fire to roar as he liked horses to gallop and men to spring into
action when he shouted an order. George swept the hearth and set the
fire tools in order.

“Christmas gif’, Gin’ral,” he repeated meekly.

“Here!” Jackson tossed a two-shilling piece. George caught it in midair,
grinned and bowed elaborately.

“Thankee, sah! Thankee! Does you go to town I git you to buy me some
store galluses, please, sah? I like some red galluses, wid big brass
buckles.”

“Keep your money. Buy candy with it. I’ll get you some red galluses. How
you hitch your britches up now?”

“Dis yere piece of rope. But it mighty near wore out and Mister Field
say he goin’ beat the next nigger cut off any his rope. Thankee, sah.”

“Now I reckon every hand on the place will have to have red galluses
with brass buckles,” snorted the General. “You’re getting measured for
shoes tomorrow, George. You wash your feet.”

“Yes, sah, sho will!”

Christmas morning! How few Christmas Days he had ever spent in his own
home, Andrew Jackson was thinking. On the march, in cheerless camps with
lonely men, in that strange mansion in Pensacola, riding eastward roads
through Tennessee to Philadelphia, to Washington. And now perhaps the
road eastward lay ahead of him again. He dreaded telling Rachel, rooted
as she was to this hillside, fixed as one of the old trees and removed
with almost as much agony. She might even refuse to take the road again.
He might face more endless months of loneliness. He looked at the little
gold-framed miniature that had never been far from his gaze since it had
been painted so many years ago.

Rachel’s direct eyes looked from it, her strong mouth was relaxed in a
little smile, the lace cap and fichu she wore softened her high brow,
where the dark hair curled, her rounded chin. Long earrings gave her an
effect of gayety that always made him happy when he studied the picture.
She had looked like that once—in Natchez where he had married her,
believing her divorced from sadistic Lewis Robards. She needed gayety.
She had had too much of responsibility, she had seen too much of sorrow.

Today should be gay. He would have fiddlers in and let the young folks
dance. He would open the best wine and make a big bowl of punch. He
jabbed his feet into his boots hurriedly, rejecting the heavy braided
coat for a lighter hunting jacket of leather.

The house was fragrant with the evergreen Emily had hung about, and
there was a comfortable odor of coffee. In the dining room Rachel was
bustling about a long table following Hannah who puffed and sputtered at
two children who kept diving, squealing, under the table to peer out
from beneath the cloth and pinch Hannah’s fat legs.

“Here—here!” barked the General. “You tads leave Hannah alone. Come out
of there.”

Instantly the pair, in nightgowns and barefooted, swarmed up his long
legs like squirrels.

“Christmas gift, uncle Jackson! Christmas gift!”

He planted a spank on each of two small rears. “There’s your Christmas
gift. Now go and get your clothes on. When you come down properly
dressed you’ll get your Christmas gift.”

“Mother’s asleep, we don’t know where our clothes are,” protested a
little boy.

“Wake her up. Wake everybody up. It’s Christmas morning.”

“Yes, sir!” The two obeyed with alacrity, rushing out shrieking, “Wake
up! Wake up! Christmas gift!”

“We have to get breakfast over so we can set the tables for dinner,”
said Rachel, “and all the people are slow and lazy this morning. Betty
says the oven won’t get hot for her spoon bread and Dilsey cut the bacon
too thick and then went off in a sulk when I scolded her.”

“I’ll get them all up,” threatened the General. He strode out through
the house to the bricked passage to the kitchen, pulled on a rope
dangling from a pole. The slave bell clanged loud and long.

“My patience,” Rachel exclaimed, “the neighbors will think the house is
afire!”

“Git them triflin’ niggers stirrin’, anyways,” said Hannah.

“Get the mugs for the children, Hannah, and tell ’Relia to get herself
upstairs to help the young ladies. And I want every bed made up right
away.”

Hannah said, “Yas’m.” She loved ordering the other maids around, being
middle-aged, faithful and privileged.

Breakfast was a gay and noisy meal. Emily was happy with a new gold
chain and locket, kissing everybody impartially as she danced around the
table. Rachel had a pearl brooch with a small blue stone in the center
and yards of white satin for caps and collars. One little boy pushed his
toy monkey around the table, perched it on people’s shoulders till
Andrew, Junior, said impatiently, “Oh, quit it, boy!”

“What are you so excited about?” the General asked Emily, when he had
followed her into the parlor.

“Why, uncle Jackson, it’s Christmas! And my lovely locket. You shouldn’t
have given me anything so fine. I’ll put a lock of your hair in it.”

“Put some young fellow’s hair in it—the right fellow, mind you! And were
you looking down that road to see if Christmas was coming?”

“Oh, no. Just more company. Aunt Rachel says there should be ten more.
Thank goodness the rain stopped.”

“Froze a little.” He took his pipe from the mantel, and the deep tobacco
jar. “Kill hogs next week if the cold weather holds. Emily, get your
aunt out of that dining room. Make her rest if you can.”

“I’ll try, but you know aunt Rachel. She won’t believe the Christmas
dinner is fit to eat unless she has dipped a spoon in every dish. I
promised to oversee setting the tables as soon as the girls have cleared
away. They’re all excited and they’ll get all the forks crooked.”

“In some ways it will be good for Rachel to get away for a while,” he
mused, half to himself, as he lifted the coal from the fire.

“Away—where?” Emily stiffened.

“Why, I shall have to return to the Senate, my dear. Have you forgotten
that I have been elected United States Senator from Tennessee? Of
course, when I go back I shall want my wife to go with me.”

“Uncle Jackson, Jack wrote me—”

“And what,” he interrupted, “did Mister Andrew Jackson Donelson write to
you?”

_That he loved me_ leaped like a lovely tongue of fairy flame into her
mind. She blinked very fast to keep uncle Jackson from reading it in her
eyes.

“He said something about circumstances—about a ground swell in
Kentucky—he was rather vague—”

He frowned, then his face lightened and his mouth quirked up at one
corner in a halfway impish grin. “So young Andrew has been hearing
rumblings in Kentucky.” Always he had refused to call his nephew by the
family nickname of Jack. “Why didn’t he write to me? Kentucky is the
fighting ground of our friend Henry Clay. If there are any honors to be
handed out, the Speaker of the House would like them for himself, no
doubt? I will tell you this much, Emily, and you will keep it to
yourself. In spite of all I can do, I have friends determined to push me
into the forefront again. Now, they are talking about running me for the
highest office in this land.”

“But that would be a great honor, uncle Jackson. Why must we keep it a
secret?”

“I don’t want to spoil her Christmas. Some women would be elated at a
chance to spend a winter in Washington, move in important circles,
perhaps be elevated to the highest position in this land. But not your
aunt Rachel. I want to talk her into the right mood, or she might refuse
to leave here and then I’d be separated from her again for a long time.”

“But she must go! I won’t let her refuse,” argued Emily. “We’ll buy her
some beautiful clothes. She can be a fine lady.”

“She’s already a fine lady,” he sighed, “but she’d rather go on here
dosing the bellyache of the most worthless hand I own than to be invited
to dinner in the proudest house in the country. I love her for her
simplicity, and I want her to enjoy peace as long as she can, so say
nothing about any plans, Emily.”

“Yes, uncle Jackson, but you could be wrong about aunt Rachel. The thing
she wants more than anything is to be with you.”

“And what I most desire is to be with her. I am singularly blessed. It
troubles me now that I grow old that the people will not let me rest.”

“You could say no. You could refuse when they thrust these
responsibilities upon you,” she reminded him, grave beyond her years.

He lifted his gaunt shoulders in a ponderous sigh. “This is a great
country, Emily, my child. Where else could a gangling, country boy with
no fortune and little education fight his way up to where he is honored
as I have been honored by my countrymen? I owe America a debt. Speaking
of debts,” his mood changed, his face grew into a sardonic grimace, “the
question is—where is the money coming from to pay for all this pride and
eminence? It costs like the devil to live in Washington and the crops
this year were disappointing. As things stand now I owe about twice as
much as I’m worth. Of course there are a lot of people who owe me—”

“Then make them pay,” she counseled. “And you should never have spent so
much money for this locket, uncle Jackson. I love you without gifts.”

“When I can’t buy a present for a pretty girl, I’ll let them cart me off
to a debtor’s prison!” he declared. “As for asking my friends to repay
money I’ve loaned them, that’s something a gentleman can’t do, Emily.”

“Then don’t be a gentleman,” she suggested boldly. “Be a politician.
They seem to be able to ask for anything they want without any qualms
whatever.”

He laughed so loudly that some of the guests came hurrying in to hear
the joke. “When James Monroe makes me ambassador to Mexico or Russia or
some other heathen spot on this globe, I’m going to make Emily Donelson
my prime counselor,” he said. “This gal has brains.”

Emily laughed and hurried out to help her aunt. She was feeling easier
in her mind. If uncle Jackson was harassed about money, he might be
relieved at hearing that Jack was not going back to school. There was
young Andy coming along to be educated and Andrew Hutchings, also a ward
of the Jacksons, and it must cost a tremendous lot to run this huge
plantation and care for all the people, white and black. And anything
aunt Rachel wanted she had, whether it was a pair of silk mitts, a
ten-dollar hat or an expensive suite of furniture shipped in at enormous
expense from halfway across the country. Somewhere Andrew Jackson found
the money to gratify Rachel’s every desire.

That expensive saddle for Andy—and her locket—and it was very certain in
her mind that there were some things that the General needed for
himself. He needed new clothes anyway. She had noted the shabbiness of
his braided coat, shiny at the elbows, and all his waistcoats were worn
on the edges.

Destiny might have planned great things for Andrew Jackson through his
lifetime, decided his niece, but fate had certainly been stingy with the
practical rewards.




                                   6


The heavy damask cloths had been spread. Another carriage full of
cousins and aunts and uncles arrived to fill the house with more
confusion. Mary Eastin and some of the other girls came to help Emily
direct the placing of the great piles of china plates, the gleaming
goblets and compotes that would be filled with uncle Jackson’s wine and
aunt Rachel’s preserves and relishes. The heavy soup ladle was rubbed
till it glittered, a mound of apples and nuts was heaped on a tray which
Emily edged with holly.

Mary Eastin, very young and eager, had a cameo face and a lilting laugh.
Life would always be gay for Mary. A president’s nephew would one day
find her irresistible, but now she was a dancing sprite, doing
pirouettes with a vinegar cruet for a partner, getting in everybody’s
way.

“You’ll break something, Mary. Do go and coax uncle Jackson to tootle on
his new flute,” urged Emily.

“He makes such silly noises on it,” protested Mary, “and he screws up
his face till I’m scared to death I’ll laugh and offend him.”

“But he loves it and it gets politics out of his mind.”

Mary grabbed Emily’s arm. “Emmy, he’s coming isn’t he? I can see it
sticking out all over you. Emmy, I think all these stuffy old people are
crazy. If I had a boy in love with me, I’d have him, no matter if every
Donelson alive croaked themselves to death.”

“Mary, for Heavens’ sake, hush! Things are going to be bad enough—I’m
just holding my breath.”

“I think it’s wonderful!” Mary’s eyes were full of stars. “Let me tell
you something though—don’t you start out being a dutiful wife like aunt
Rachel. A woman can get herself simply _subjugated_ by being so
worshipful. I mean to keep my spirit and my personality, whoever I
marry. Aunt Rachel’s kind of wife is going out of fashion.”

Emily bent her brows together. Of course Jack would expect a dutiful
wife. Hadn’t he been trained by uncle Jackson, who had never known any
other mode of life except to be master in his house? Jack would expect
his wife to be a gracious copy of aunt Rachel—with a bit more style
perhaps, and more ease in company, Emily amended, with no disloyalty.
Aunt Rachel was good. She did not need a flair for clever conversation
or the sly, pretty arts by which some women kept men enthralled, but as
Mary had said, times were changing. Women even went to colleges now and
read deep books.

Rachel came in then, followed by Hannah and the maids, all carrying
steaming dishes.

“What are you moppets whispering about?” she asked. “Beaus, I’ll wager.”

“Oh, we’re far too young, aunt Rachel. And too utterly well bred,” Mary
replied saucily.

“Plotting against the whites,” evaded Emily. “What’s in that dish,
Dilsey? It smells wonderful.”

“Dilsey’s candied yams are always perfect,” Rachel said. “Mary, you run
and fetch all the boys and tell them to carry in every extra chair. And
tell Andy to have George ring the bell. Your uncle and the other men
have likely wandered off to the stables. I never have put a meal on the
table yet that didn’t have to compete for their concern with some colt.
Hannah, we’ll set the ham at this end, and the turkeys at the other.
Levin can carve at this other table and Mr. Jackson here, and you and
Dilsey can serve the children their plates. That small table makes it
crowded, but I couldn’t bear to make the little ones wait. I like all my
family together at Christmas.”

Her family, all the Donelsons, whom the General, having no kin of his
own, had taken to his heart generously, as he had taken John Eaton and
John Overton, Ralph, the young painter, and, twenty years ago, Aaron
Burr—too bad that charming man had come to be in bad repute!—even Sam
Houston! Rachel glowed with happiness as the clan came noisily into the
room. This was as things should be. She took the chair Ralph pulled out
for her, bent her head in a little prayer of thankfulness, of entreaty
to God that things would go on like this forever, so long as they lived,
in peace here at their Hermitage.

Then there was the sudden crash of a door at the rear of the house, a
chilly gust blew into the room and from the pantry there were squeals of
delighted welcome from the waiting servants. The inner door was flung
back and a travel-stained figure strode into the room.

“Christmas gift, everybody!” shouted Andrew Jackson Donelson.

Emily upset her glass as she half rose from her chair. Carving knife
poised, Andrew Jackson stood drawn back sternly at the head of the
table.

“Sir!” he barked in a military tone, “you have disobeyed me!”

Andrew Jackson Donelson made a little bow, while the others held their
breath.

“Uncle, I admit my disobedience,” Jack said humbly. “I have come home
because now you will have need of me. I have come home to help you win
the nomination for the office of President of the United States.”

Rachel’s little cry of protest was lost in the gasps of the uninformed
around the tables. A few of the men looked wise and complacent and Emily
noted that John Eaton wore a smug grin.

Andrew Jackson made a slashing motion with the knife as though he
flourished a defiant sword.

“Young man, I have no intention of seeking the nomination for the office
of President of the United States!” he shouted.

“I should say not!” put in Rachel’s small, shaken voice.

Jack’s laughter echoed John Eaton’s grin. “You may not be seeking the
nomination, sir, but that nomination is certainly out gunning for you!
All over Kentucky they’re talking of nothing else—Jackson for President,
in 1824—right under Henry Clay’s nose! They say Clay is looking for a
ground-hog hole to crawl into dragging his whisky barrel after him. And
look at this!” He pulled the ragged page of a newspaper from his pocket,
marched to the head of the table and spread it before his uncle’s eyes.
“I picked it up in Transylvania, brought it along—thought you might not
have seen it.”

John Eaton sprang to study the paper. “The _New York Post_!” he
exclaimed. “We missed that one. Let’s see what they say.”

“What they say,” reported Jack, while the General still glowered at the
paper, “is that if the country was under martial law Andrew Jackson
would be the proper choice for president. That not being the case, the
_Post_ will continue their support of Secretary of the Navy, Smith
Thompson, for the nomination in 1824.”

“Smith Thompson—about as much chance for him as for me!” snorted one of
the Donelson clan.

“Crawford will be in the running too,” remarked Ralph Earl. “Not a man
in the Cabinet who doesn’t believe he would be a better president than
John Quincy Adams, who is certain he’ll be elected president.”

“Nobody told me—nobody said a word!” mourned Rachel, looking stunned. “I
knew he’d been elected senator—but president!”

Jack went to her quickly, put his hands on her quivering shoulders.
“We’ll make you a queen, aunt Rachel. We’ll make you the grandest lady
in the land!”

“And I’ll have to live in Washington—when I want to stay at home!” she
protested. “I don’t want to be a queen. Jack, wash yourself and come and
eat your dinner. Mr. Jackson, do serve the children! Hannah, pass the
vegetables. All of you, eat your dinner—your Christmas dinner.”

Obediently, Andrew Jackson made wooden motions of slicing at the turkey.
John Eaton took the knife from his hand.

“Sit and eat, sir. Let me finish this business. He’s bound to be
nominated, you know,” he addressed the whole group. “It’s a ground
swell, stirring all over the country. Why, just yesterday the _Nashville
Clarion_ stated that the General was unquestionably the choice of the
people, in justice to themselves! Here, Hannah, here’s a fine drumstick
for some hungry boy. Wait, you haven’t any gravy.”

Andrew Jackson looked down the long table at his wife with a look of
humble pleading in his eyes that she had never seen there before.

“I was going to tell you tomorrow, my love,” he said meekly. “I had
warned them all. But that young scoundrel ruined everything.” He glared
at Jack Donelson who patted his aunt’s cheek unperturbed.

“He’s going to need me, aunt Rachel,” he said gleefully. “I deserve the
rough edge of his tongue now, he thinks, maybe even his riding crop on
my breeches. But he knows he’s going to be needing all the help he can
get, and you too! You’ll need a strong, smart boy around here when all
the furor starts, and I’m that boy. Just one more statement, sir.” Jack
looked at his uncle, his chin high and firm. “I have a further
announcement to make. I came home because I saw your situation and your
need for assistance. Also I came home to marry Emily Donelson, if so be
she will have me—with or without the consent of this assembled family, I
mean to marry Emily.”

“And that,” shouted the General, rapping the table with his glass, “I
will not countenance!”

Rachel got to her feet, startling them all a little.

“Then I will countenance it,” she said, in a tone few of them had ever
heard her use before. “When young people are in love, that’s the
important thing. Maybe you think I don’t know what it is to be in love,
Mr. Jackson—but unless your memory is very short, you do! There was a
time when you trampled all the difficulties down with fine scorn—and if
Jack hasn’t the courage to do as we did, then he’s no nephew of mine!”

“My dear—” began Jackson, uncertainly, “I had no idea you felt this
way!”

“Well, I do feel that way. And I say it’s fine and beautiful for these
children who love each other to marry—and I say that nobody is going to
oppose it.”

Jackson rose, smiling ruefully, and laid a hand on Emily’s cheek. “I
seem to be outvoted,” he remarked.

“Sorry, sir.” Jack’s grin did not quiver. “You are outvoted. I vote
against you—and aunt Rachel—and Emily too, I hope? My dear, are you
standing with me against all these frowning elders?”

She sprang up and ran to stand beside him. “Oh—I am, I am!”

“The matter is now settled.” Jack kissed her gravely while all the
children screamed their delight and some of the women began to cry,
then, still jauntily, Jack picked up the glass of wine before his aunt’s
plate. “A toast to the bride! And to the next President of the United
States, Andrew Jackson!”

Chairs fell backward as the company got to their feet. The servants all
shrilled approving cries. The hubbub and chatter drowned out Rachel’s
admonishing voice, begging everybody to be quiet and eat before
everything got cold. Somehow the dinner was finished. The General sat in
silence through the rest of the meal, and aunt Rachel was still too,
Emily observed, her fingers shaking as she handled her fork and spoon.
Emily went quickly and kissed her on the cheek.

“You’ll have me beside you always, aunt Rachel,” she whispered.
“Always!”

“I’ll need you, Emily,” Rachel whispered hoarsely. “I’ll need
everybody.”

Her eyes looked far and strained as though she saw before her those next
five stormy years. The year that would see Andrew Jackson defeated for
the office of president when the election was carried into the Senate of
the United States by the failure of any of the seven candidates to win a
majority in the electoral college, defeated by the trades and connivings
of Henry Clay and by the one vote in the New York delegation of a
tremulous, undecided man named Van Rensselaer.

And after that the terrible years when the power and strength of Andrew
Jackson would mount in an invincible tide, when her own name would be
pilloried and long-buried agonies she had tried to forget dragged from
their graves and published abroad to discredit her and her man on
horseback. The years that would be too much for the faithful, failing
heart of Rachel Jackson.

She would never be a queen in that palace in Washington. But she had no
wish to be a queen. As the day darkened into dusk and the candles were
lighted, she stood alone at her window looking out upon her quiet
garden, sleeping its winter sleep that promised the wakening of beauty
in the springtime.

It would be a pleasant place to sleep, she was thinking. But at least,
at long last, she had had her Christmas at the Hermitage.




                               Footnotes


[1]Young Andrew was the master of the Hermitage when eventually that
    tragedy did occur, and Rachel Jackson had lain for eight years under
    the roses of her garden.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HER CHRISTMAS AT THE
HERMITAGE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
